if you live in a hot spot for
earthquakes like i do
you may have had these familiar shaking
feelings
the ground trembling underneath you
pictures rattling on the walls
your neighbor's dog yapping across the
yard
an earthquake is basically tectonic
plates moving
and grinding against each other rub your
hands together really fast right now
things heating up that's energy when
these plates energy get released
you and your neighbor's dog feel it on
land
yes we're all surfing on giant pieces of
floating on hot liquid rock you're
surfing right now while watching this
video
sometimes one slides under another like
reaching in between the couch cushions
for that remote that slipped down there
if you're wearing long sleeves they get
rolled up on your arm
like a snake shedding its skin when
plate tectonics do this
mountains form but let's zoom out from
your bedroom
even further keep going there
earth the third planet from the sun
covered in mountains
canyons and those familiar continents
with oceans
stretching between and all around them
but our planet used to have just one
single supercontinent
pangaea where all the land masses were
hugging each other and enjoying the
sweet life surrounded by one
massive super ocean africa and australia
were neighbors
the americas and asia popped up for a
howdy neighbor
but fast forward about 300 million years
and
here we are and there you are hanging 10
on molten rock
as the ground beneath you forms
mountains ridges volcanoes
and earthquakes sounds hardcore but you
don't feel like you're moving do you
you also don't feel like your body is
going highway speeds when you ride in a
car
that's physics and it's a funny thing
right now the plate under you
is only moving a couple of inches a year
up to four when things get
super speedy per day that comes to half
the width of a strand of hair
so let's speed things up a bit say 300
feet a day
and me too you're sitting in your room
enjoying a delicious cup of hot cocoa
scrolling the feed and watching some
videos as you set the mug on the
nightstand
you begin to feel dizzy like the room is
spinning
you check your drink and see the liquid
inside is swaying like crazy
uh-oh now you're swaying you manage to
get up but can't keep your balance
everything topples over like a tornado
in the room you duck underneath your bed
and cover your head
there's a power outage and now you can't
see anything
there are two things to keep in mind
when it comes to earthquakes
magnitude and intensity magnitude is the
size of the quake
it's just one constant number intensity
is how much shaking it causes that
number can be different
depending on where you're measuring from
the most powerful earthquake ever was in
chile in 1960
its magnitude measured 9.5 on the
richter scale
above 7 is considered severe the quake
caused tsunamis
all the way to japan hawaii the
philippines
and even new zealand the damage cost
millions of dollars in repairs
in the dark you can still feel the
ground shaking below you
and since the crust cut across 300 feet
today the ground rips open
the landscape where you used to bike
around is now sprouting deep earth rocks
and minerals
the buildings all around begin to
collapse but luckily
you managed to sneak off and escape into
an open space
there isn't any service on your phone
either the cell towers toppled over
during the quake
but the ground is still shaking and with
the plates moving so fast
the earth's interior begins to show its
true colors
and that color is red red for red hot
you can see the mantle at this point the
earth like an onion
is revealing its layers with magma
flowing right in front of you
you'd think you're in a disaster movie
suddenly you get a whiff of salty sea
air
and now you're standing on the beach but
wait a minute
you don't live by the coast if an
earthquake strength is measured by
magnitude and intensity
this one's a doozy it probably
originated out of the ocean
and stretched all the way inland where
you are it caused a tidal wave so big
the coast just came to your landlocked
town waves of ocean water are gathering
near the edges of the city
farms and rivers are all gone with a
single tidal wave
the land that was good for agriculture
is no more
and as the ground below you keeps on
cutting it lets in some ocean water
between the gaps
it collides with a magma that's rising
steam shoots up from the ground
and the earth looks like a giant tea
kettle with the power out and no cell
signals
there's no way of communicating with
anyone and that's just the thing with
earthquakes
they can show up with hardly any warning
unlike earthquakes tornadoes and
typhoons
with those we can predict their path and
intensity
we can prepare even volcanic eruptions
give people enough time to evacuate and
reach safe ground
but earthquakes are just in a league of
their own
and with all the buildings collapsing
around you you'd be seeing a smoke
screen of dust and debris
the air would be unbreathable better
grab a gas mask
often the distance are the mountains
you've always enjoyed you trekked along
the trails every other weekend
and had some fantastic camping trips
along the river but the earthquake drags
across the center of the mountain
and creates enough pressure to cut it
trees start falling over
the mountain becomes a pile of rock and
dust it's not over yet
the shaking ground makes large pieces of
land and rocks slide down
and head towards the town some
landslides are so massive
they're enough to wipe out entire
villages in remote areas
many come after heavy rain others come
completely unexpected
with the ground opening beneath you many
of the objects on land get swallowed
into the pit
cars trees buildings statues you name it
you're able to find safe ground but you
can't really
know if it's all that safe all this is
happening in your town in places across
the globe
but it's about to get even more global
plate tectonics are crucial for life on
earth
one of their main duties in a thankless
job was maintaining the planet's
comfortable livable temperature
without land masses floating around on a
layer of liquid rock
there'd be no life on the liveliest
planet we know so far
a couple of billion years ago earth was
just a little ice ball
this was because the sun much younger
back then
was colder than it is today you'd think
the oceans would be frozen and good
enough to skate from the atlantic to the
pacific
but they weren't and it's all because
scientists believe the shifting plates
underneath kept the oceans warm and cozy
they did that by creating underwater
volcanoes
besides lava and many gases they spewed
carbon dioxide into the atmosphere
which trapped the heat on earth as the
sun gradually got hotter
rainfall was able to drag the carbon
dioxide back to the ground
and into the mantle and this cycle was
able to help the earth
maintain its temperature to host us gee
how thoughtful
earth is so unique because of these
plate tectonics
no other planet in the solar system can
brag at the same
except for jupiter's frozen moon europa
it's shown evidence of moving plate
tectonics within the core
and even though venus and mars have hot
interiors
there hasn't been any sign of such
activity
as the ground continues to cut across
the land everything inside has now
descended
underground if the plates were to move
300 feet a day for a year
the entire planet's landscape would go
through a total makeover
a bad one life as we know would cease to
exist
except for maybe microscopic bacteria
and a few insects that can survive such
harsh conditions
the polar ice caps wouldn't hold any
more eyes and volcanoes would
continuously be erupting
the planet would just end up looking
like a hot fireball of destruction
and maybe even burn up entirely
luckily this is purely a hypothetical
thought experiment
so sit back relax and don't worry about
the ground moving under your feet
it's taking its sweet time at a safe
pace
woohoo